We all hate

Charlie Chaplin might have said “You don’t hate! Only the unloved hate – the unloved and the unnatural!”, but humanity is once again at a crossroads where in order to realize that the only way forward is love, hatred must be understood as natural. We all hate, and it is perfectly human.

One might ask why there is so much violence in the world, and it is a rather funny thing to ask. We were all present for the unravelling of our life’s own movie. We are permanent spectators of the actions we undertake and should have in our hands all the information required to understand any episode in which we partake. We even take offense if our actions are misunderstood, given that we have a perfectly good set of reasons to excuse them.

“I woke up and I was already nervous because today was the due date of the assignment. I needed a good grade to pass the course. Then John told me he had not done his part and that he did not care about the outcome of the project. I snapped, raised my voice and yelled at him to get lost. I hate John.”

After going through the process of analyzing the self, one will discover a natural chain of events, where each is clearly justified by its predecessor in a series of events that seem to result in an inevitable outcome.

If such is the case, why is the same discovery not made when analyzing the other? Let’s imagine that John had already passed the course and that this was an optional assignment for him. Would he have remembered that others might need the assignment to pass the course? Or would he have simply not thought about it, and perceive his colleague’s violent reaction as unjustified and incomprehensible?

It should be clear that hatred and violence are not reserved for those who are mean or “naturally” evil. The great mute actor’s words might as well be changed to “You hate! The unloved hate, and the loved as well.” 

Our human character is fatalistic in this sense: we will hate, and we will envy, just like we will love, and we will cherish. These are all human emotions and as such one would be incomplete without any of them. But there is a big difference between feeling something and willfully desiring something else.

What is of paramount importance is understanding what led one to choose hatred. It never comes about uninvited, yet we must have at our disposal the tools to quickly do away with this guest. And if someone looks as though swallowed in these dark flames of human emotion, one must remember it is still a human that is burning.

13/07/2025